---
title: "2021 American Society of Health Economics Conference"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2021ashe
venue: "American Society of Health Economics Conference"
date: 2021-06-23
location: "Online"
---

This talk presented my dissertation research on physician learning and the administrative structure of Medicare. The conference page can be found [here](https://ashecon.confex.com/ashecon/2021/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/10750). The abstract for the paper presented is given below.

The value of innovative technologies and practices are often initially uncertain, with many entities hesitant to adopt unproven innovations. As the innovation is deployed more widely, it becomes more familiar and the uncertainty surrounding its efficacy dissipates, leading to spillovers in knowledge about the usefulness of the innovation to entities that have not utilized the technology. These knowledge spillovers, rather than being limited to entities that are closely connected to early adopters, may accrue to all entities as the global body knowledge develops. In this paper, I examine how these global knowledge spillovers shape the path of diffusion of new medical technologies. In particular, I exploit geographic variation in the decisions of Medicare to pay for the procedures to identify providers who exogenously adopt the technologies earlier (when information on the new procedure is scarce) or later (when the value of the technology is less uncertain). Thus I am able to identify the value of the knowledge generated by early adopters that spills over to other providers. Using data on extended Holter monitors, I show that although physicians learn from their own experience more than from other physicians, these spillovers are still an important reason why a new medical technology becomes adopted. In counterfactual simulations, I find that a more permissive regulatory regime that takes these knowledge spillovers into account would increase the use of new technologies and accelerate learning by providers. This leads to utilization patterns more similar to those that would obtain under full information, implying improved patient welfare.
