---
title: "2020 Midwest International Economic Development Conference"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2020MWIEDC
venue: "Midwest International Economic Development Conference"
date: 2014-02-01
location: "Online"
---

In this talk, I presented my research with Dylan Fitz on the potential for a large social program in Brazil to reverse or reinforce existing differences in children's health capital. The talk was titled "Early-Life Shocks and Childhood Social Programs: Evidence of Potential Catch-Up in Brazil" and resulted in the research paper of the same name, found [here](https://rileyleague.github.io/publications/catchup). The abstract for the talk is given below.

Early-life shocks often produce negative long-run consequences into adulthood, but little is known about how childhood social programs interact with early-life environments. In this paper, we evaluate the effect of adverse early-life conditions on childhood human capital and evaluate whether access to a conditional cash transfer program is more or less effective among children who experienced adverse early-life events. If childhood programs help children recover from early-life shocks, their potential cost effectiveness may be considerable with these short-run programs in childhood potentially providing long-run benefits persisting into adulthood. We determine exogenous variation in early-life environments using historical municipal-level rainfall data and evaluate the impact of Brazil’s Bolsa Família program, testing the effects of both early-life environment and the social program on childhood health and educational outcomes. We find that birth year rainfall impacts child stunting, with a one standard deviation reduction in birth year rainfall causing the probability of stunting to increase by 1.0 to 3.7 percentage points. We then find that the duration of Bolsa treatment impacts stunting, obesity, and other outcomes in nonlinear ways. With stunting, the probability of being stunted falls for treatment levels of 1-4.5 years, especially among children who faced negative birth year rainfall conditions. We also surprisingly find that Bolsa treatment negatively impacts several health z-scores, an effect that appears to be driven by a decrease in the probability of being overweight among those who experienced unexpectedly low birth year rainfall. These results suggest that early-life shocks can negatively impact human capital among children but that relatively short-term access to childhood programs can help benefit children. These results indicate that Bolsa not only leads to positive impacts for children, but that it can allow those exposed to adverse early-life conditions to catch up to others. By facilitating the recovery from shock with long-run impacts, this may present one channel through which CCT programs produce long-run benefits.
